README.md, before:

# KaMRaT

-----
KaMRaT is a C++ tool for finding substrings with interesting properties in large NGS datasets. 

KaMRaT requires a k-mer count matrix extracted from the NGS files (e.g. with Jellyfish), and labels for each sample. 

KaMRaT then provides a set of tools for reducing the k-mer matrix and extending k-mers to longer contigs. The main subfunctions are:

- kamrat index: index feature* count table on disk
- kamrat merge: merge k-mers into contigs, produces a contig count table
- kamrat filter: exclude/retain features* by expression level 
- kamrat mask: exclude/retain *k*-mers matching given fasta sequences
- kamrat rank: rank features* according to labels and statistical test
- kamrat query: estimate count vectors of given list of contigs

Note: \*	features can be not only *k*-mers or *k*-mer contigs, but also general features such as genes or transcripts.

KaMRaT means "k-mer Matrix Reduction Toolkit", or "k-mer Matrix, Really Tremendous !".

-----

## Quick Start: Demos

**Variables**

```bash
indir="demo-data/inputs"
outdir="demo-data/outputs"
sample_list=(sample1 sample2)
dsgnfile=$indir/rank-design.txt
kmer_tab_path=$outdir/kmer-counts.tsv.gz
```

***k*-mer matrix preparation**

```bash
mkdir $outdir

# Step 1: jellyfish count & dump
for s in ${sample_list[@]} # $sample_list contains list of considered sample names
do
	jellyfish count -m 31 -s 1000000 -C -o $outdir/$s.jf -F 2 <(zcat $indir/$s.R1.fastq.gz) <(zcat $indir/$s.R2.fastq.gz)
	jellyfish dump -c $outdir/$s.jf | sort -k 1 > $outdir/$s.txt
done
# Step 2: joinCounts
echo -n "tag" | gzip -c > $kmer_tab_path
for s in ${sample_list[@]} # $sample_list contains list of considered sample names
do
	echo -ne "\t"$s | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path
done
echo "" | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif joinCounts -r 1 -a 1 $outdir/*.txt | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path # no filter of recurrence
```

**KaMRaT index**

```bash
mkdir $outdir/kamrat.idx
# Make index for k-mer matrix with k=31, unstranded mode, and with a count per billion normalization
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat index -intab $kmer_tab_path -outdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -klen 31 -unstrand -nfbase 1000000000
```

**KaMRaT rank-merge approach**

```bash
# Select top 50% of relevant k-mers using ttest pi-value
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat rank -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -rankby ttest.pi -design $indir/rank-design.txt -outpath $outdir/top-ranked-kmers.ttest-pi.bin -seltop 0.5
# Extend k-mers by tolerating overlap from 30nc to 15nc, intervened by Pearson distance <= 0.20, and with mean contig count
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat merge -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -overlap 30-15 -with $outdir/top-ranked-kmers.ttest-pi.bin -interv pearson:0.20 -outpath $outdir/contig-counts.ttest-pi.pearson20.tsv -withcounts mean
```

**KaMRaT merge-rank approach**

```bash
# Extend k-mers by tolerating overlap from 30nc to 15nc, intervened by Pearson distance <= 0.20, and with mean contig count
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat merge -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -overlap 30-15 -interv pearson:0.20 -outpath $outdir/contigs.pearson20.bin
# Select top 50% of relevant contigs using ttest pi-value
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat rank -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -rankby ttest.pi -design $indir/rank-design.txt -seltop 0.5 -with $outdir/contigs.pearson20.bin -outpath $outdir/top-ranked-contigs.pearson20.ttest-pi.tsv -withcounts
```

## Typical Workflow of KaMRaT

KaMRaT *per se* is shown at the center of the workflow. It is a C++ program that takes as input a count matrix and produces another matrix as output.
In the workflow shown, KaMRaT is used for reducing a count matrix produced from a set of fastq files and producing a reduced matrix with features of interest with respect to conditions in the input sample-info file.

![workflow](./docs/workflow.png)

The feature matrix contains features in row and samples in column. Features can be *k*-mers (for all modules) as well as other general features such as genes/transcripts (only for KaMRaT-index, -filter, and -rank). The feature counts can be either normalized or non-normalized. 

The *k*-mer feature matrix can be constructed with the following possibilities: 

-   The [Snakefile](./related-tools/prepare_kmer_table/Snakefile) provided with the project + [DE-kupl joinCounts](https://github.com/Transipedia/dekupl-joinCounts)
-   [Kmtricks](https://github.com/tlemane/kmtricks) software
-   [DE-kupl](https://github.com/Transipedia/dekupl-run)'s raw-counts.tsv or masked-counts.tsv matrices

A set of auxiliary tools to be used for upstream and downstream of kamrat are provided:
+ Upstream tools: 
  + A matrix generating module controlled by Snakemake which applying jellyfish and DE-kupl joinCounts module
  + A bash script for generating a submatrix by selecting from it a set of columns
+ Downstream tools:
  + A feature selection model with an R script applying ridge/lasso regressions and random forest classifier
  + A contig counting module implemented in C++ for estimating the counts of a list of contigs in an independent dataset; it also supports evaluation of sample count coherence among contig's compositional k-mers 
  + A model evaluation module written in R taking a trained model and evaluating it with a feature count matrix and feature conditions

## Installation

<details>
<summary>Build from source</summary>

### Dependencies

+ [MLPack 3.3.2](https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack/releases/tag/3.3.2)
+ [Boost-iostreams](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_74_0/libs/iostreams/doc/index.html)

MLPack can be installed on [Linux/Mac](https://mlpack.org/doc/mlpack-3.3.2/doxygen/build.html), [Windows](https://mlpack.org/doc/mlpack-3.3.2/doxygen/build_windows.html), or via [conda](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/mlpack) by following the corresponding links.  
If you are installing MLPack with conda, please add the following line into your `.bashrc` file in the `home/` directory before compiling KaMRaT:

``` bash
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path_to_conda_env/mlpack/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

### Clone and Build

Firstly, clone the repository:

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/Transipedia/KaMRaT.git
cd KaMRaT
```

If you installed MLPack library with conda:

``` bash
bash compile.bash /path_to_MLPack_conda_environment
```

Otherwise, if you installed MLPack without conda:

``` bash
bash compile.bash
```

Finally, an executable binary file is available as `bin/kamrat`.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Use singularity</summary>

If using KaMRaT inside singularity, only by pulling from docker hub is enough:

```bash
singularity build KaMRaT.sif docker://xuehl/kamrat:latest
```
</details>

## General Information

### Sample Information File

The sample-info file is indicated by the option `-smp-info`. This file aims to indicate which columns in the k-mer count matrix should be considered as sample columns. Please do not put any header line in the file, since the columns are already defined by convention as below.  

+ If the file contains only one column, it indicates sample names, and all samples are considered as the same condition
+ If the file contains two columns, the first column corresponds to sample names, and the second corresponds to conditions (*e.g.* tumor, normal)
+ If the file is not provided, all columns in the matrix apart from the first one are considered as samples

### Input Count Matrix for KaMRaT


The input count matrix should be in .tsv or .tsv.gz format, in which fields are separated by tabulations. 
In the matrix, features are presented as rows, and samples as columns. The first column in matrix should always be the feature column (sequences or feature names).  
"Features" can be any quantified feature such as genes, k-mers or contigs. k-mers or contigs are represented by their own sequence.
KaMRaT accepts extra columns representing non-count values, e.g. feature's p-value, score, etc. In this case, a smp-info file is mandatory for indicating which columns are the count columns.

### Output Count Matrix by KaMRaT

The output count matrix is also .tsv format table, where fields are separated by tabs.  
In the matrix, the features are presented as rows, and the columns are in same order as the input.  
KaMRaT guarantees the information of output matrix is coherent with that of the input matrix. For KaMRaT-rank, though there are steps of count normalization, log transformation and standardization for score evaluation, the count values in output matrix are kept same as input (raw count).

## Usage

Note: if you use KaMRaT in command line, please remember to indicate the full path to KaMRaT binary file.

### KaMRaT Execution

We recommande using KaMRaT within ```singularity```:

``` bash
singularity exec -B /bind_src:/bind_des kamrat <CMD> [options] input_table 
# <CMD> can be one of filter, mask, merge, rank
```

The ```-B``` option is for binding disk partitions to singularity image, please check ```singularity``` helper for details:

```bash
singularity exec -h
```

It's also executable directly on command line:

```bash
/path_to_KaMRaT_bin_dir/kamrat <CMD> [options] input_table 
# <CMD> can be one of filter, mask, merge, rank
```

In the following sections, we present under the situation of using KaMRaT in ```singularity```.  
For running it directly on command line, please replace the leading ```singularity exec -B /bind_src:/bind_des``` by the path to KaMRaT binary file.

### KaMRaT Helper

KaMRaT's top-level helper is accessible by typing one of these commands:

``` bash
singularity exec kamrat
singularity exec kamrat -h
singularity exec kamrat -help
```

Helpers of each KaMRaT modules are accessible via:

``` bash
# <CMD> can be one from filter, mask, merge, rank #
singularity exec kamrat <CMD> -h
singularity exec kamrat <CMD> -help
```

### KaMRaT Usage by Module

<details>
<summary>index: index feature count table on disk</summary>

```text
[USAGE]    kamrat index -intab STR -outdir STR [-klen INT -unstrand -nfbase INT]

[OPTION]         -h, -help      Print the helper
                 -intab STR     Input table for index, mandatory
                 -outdir STR    Output index directory, mandatory
                 -klen          k-mer length, mandatory if features are k-mer
                                    if present, indexation will be switched to k-mer mode
                 -unstrand      Unstranded mode, indexation with canonical k-mers
                                    if present, indexation will be switched to k-mer mode
                 -nfbase INT    Base for calculating normalization factor
                                    normCount_ij <- INT * rawCount_ij / sum_i{rawCount_ij}
                                    if not provided, input counts will not be normalized
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>filter: filter feature by expression level</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat filter -idxdir STR -design STR [-upmin INT1:INT2 -downmax INT1:INT2 -reverse -outpath STR -withcounts]

[OPTION]         -h,-help              Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR           Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -design STR           Path to filter design file, a table of two columns, mandatory
                                           the first column indicate sample names
                                           the second column should be either UP or DOWN (capital letters)
                                               samples with UP will be considered as up-regulated samples
                                               samples with DOWN will be considered as down-regulated samples
                                               samples not given will be neutral (not considered for filter)
                                               samples can also be all UP or all DOWN
                 -upmin INT1:INT2      Up feature lower bound, [1:1, meaning no filter]
                                           output features counting >= INT1 in >= INT2 UP-samples
                 -downmax INT1:INT2    Down feature upper bound [inf:1, meaning no filter]
                                           output features counting <= INT1 in >= INT2 DOWN-samples
                 -reverse              Reverse filter, to remove eligible features [false]
                 -outpath STR          Path to results after filter
                                           if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts           Output sample count vectors [false]
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>mask: mask k-mers from matrix</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat mask -idxdir STR -fasta STR [-reverse -outpath STR -withcounts]
              
[OPTION]         -h,-help         Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR      Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -fasta STR       Sequence fasta file as the mask, mandatory;
                 -reverse         Reverse mask, to select the k-mers in sequence fasta file [false];
                 -outpath STR     Path to extension results
                                      if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts      Output sample count vectors [false]
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>merge: extend k-mers into contigs</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat merge -idxdir STR -overlap MAX-MIN [-with STR1[:STR2] -interv STR[:FLOAT] -min-nbkmer INT -outpath STR -withcounts STR]

[OPTION]         -h,-help               Print the helper;
                 -idxdir STR            Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory;
                 -overlap MAX-MIN       Overlap range for extension, mandatory
                                            MIN and MAX are integers, MIN <= MAX < k-mer length;
                 -with STR1[:STR2]      File indicating k-mers to be extended (STR1) and rep-mode (STR2)
                                            if not provided, all indexed k-mers are used for extension
                                            in the file STR1, a supplementary column of rep-value can be provided
                                            STR2 can be one of {min, minabs, max, maxabs} [min];
                 -interv STR[:FLOAT]    Intervention method for extension [pearson:0.20]
                                            can be one of {none, pearson, spearman, mac}
                                            the threshold may follow a ':' symbol;
                 -min-nbkmer INT        Minimal length of extended contigs [0];
                 -outpath STR           Path to extension results
                                            if not provided, output to screen;
                 -withcounts STR        Output sample count vectors, STR can be one of [mean, median]
                                            if not provided, output without count vector
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>rank: rank features according to their association with sample conditions</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat rank -idxdir STR -count-mode STR -rankby STR -design STR [-with STR1[:STR2] -seltop NUM -outpath STR -withcounts]

[OPTION]         -h,-help             Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR          Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -rankby STR          Ranking method, mandatory, can be one of:
                                          ttest.padj      adjusted p-value of t-test between conditions
                                          ttest.pi        \u03C0-value of t-test between conditions
                                          snr             signal-to-noise ratio between conditions
                                          dids            DIDS score
                                          lr:nfold        accuracy by logistic regression classifier
                                          bayes:nfold     accuracy by naive Bayes classifier
                                          svm:nfold       accuracy on SVM classifier
                 -design STR          Path to file indicating sample-condition design
                                          without header line, each row can be either:
                                          sample name, sample condition
                                          sample name, sample condition, sample batch (only for lrc, nbc, and svm)
                 -with STR1[:STR2]    File indicating features to rank (STR1) and counting mode (STR2)
                                          if not provided, all indexed features are used for ranking
                                          STR2 can be one of [rep, mean, median]
                 -seltop NUM          Select top ranked features
                                          if NUM > 1, number of top features to select (should be integer)
                                          if 0 < NUM <= 1, ratio of top features to select
                                          if absent or NUM <= 0, output all features
                 -outpath STR         Path to ranking result
                                          if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts          Output sample count vectors [false]

[NOTE]     For ranking methods lrc, nbc, and svm, a univariate CV fold number (nfold) can be provided
               if nfold = 0, leave-one-out cross-validation
               if nfold = 1, without cross-validation, training and testing on the whole datset
               if nfold > 1, n-fold cross-validation
           For t-test ranking methods, a transformation log2(x + 1) is applied to sample counts
           For SVM ranking, sample counts standardization is applied feature by feature
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>query: query sequences</summary>

```text
[USAGE]    kamrat query -idxdir STR -fasta STR -toquery STR [-withabsent -outpath STR]

[OPTION]         -h,-help         Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR      Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -fasta STR       Sequence fasta file, mandatory
                 -toquery STR     Query method, mandatory, can be one of:
                                      mean        mean count among all composite k-mers for each sample
                                      median      median count among all composite k-mers for each sample
                 -withabsent      Output also absent queries (count vector all 0) [default: false]
                 -outpath STR     Path to extension results
                                      if not provided, output to screen
```

</details>

## Software/Library Citations

Armadillo:

+ Conrad Sanderson and Ryan Curtin. Armadillo: a template-based C++ library for linear algebra. Journal of Open Source Software, Vol. 1, pp. 26, 2016.
+ Conrad Sanderson and Ryan Curtin. A User-Friendly Hybrid Sparse Matrix Class in C++. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), Vol. 10931, pp. 422-430, 2018.

[Boost C++ Library](https://www.boost.org/)

DE-kupl: Audoux, J., Philippe, N., Chikhi, R. et al. DE-kupl: exhaustive capture of biological variation in RNA-seq data through k-mer decomposition. Genome Biol 18, 243 (2017).

MLPack: R.R. Curtin, M. Edel, M. Lozhnikov, Y. Mentekidis, S. Ghaisas, S. Zhang. mlpack 3: a fast, flexible machine learning library. Journal of Open Source Software 3:26, 2018.

glmnet: Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Rob Tibshirani. "Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent." Journal of statistical software 33.1 (2010): 1.

randomForest: Liaw, Andy, and Matthew Wiener. "Classification and regression by randomForest." R news 2.3 (2002): 18-22.

Commit message:

update README.md: sort after jellyfish dump

README.md, after:

# KaMRaT

-----
KaMRaT is a C++ tool for finding substrings with interesting properties in large NGS datasets. 

KaMRaT requires a k-mer count matrix extracted from the NGS files (e.g. with Jellyfish), and labels for each sample. 

KaMRaT then provides a set of tools for reducing the k-mer matrix and extending k-mers to longer contigs. The main subfunctions are:

- kamrat index: index feature* count table on disk
- kamrat merge: merge k-mers into contigs, produces a contig count table
- kamrat filter: exclude/retain features* by expression level 
- kamrat mask: exclude/retain *k*-mers matching given fasta sequences
- kamrat rank: rank features* according to labels and statistical test
- kamrat query: estimate count vectors of given list of contigs

Note: \*	features can be not only *k*-mers or *k*-mer contigs, but also general features such as genes or transcripts.

KaMRaT means "k-mer Matrix Reduction Toolkit", or "k-mer Matrix, Really Tremendous !".

-----

## Quick Start: Demos

**Variables**

```bash
indir="demo-data/inputs"
outdir="demo-data/outputs"
sample_list=(sample1 sample2)
dsgnfile=$indir/rank-design.txt
kmer_tab_path=$outdir/kmer-counts.tsv.gz
```

***k*-mer matrix preparation**

```bash
mkdir $outdir

# Step 1: jellyfish count & dump
for s in ${sample_list[@]} # $sample_list contains list of considered sample names
do
	jellyfish count -m 31 -s 1000000 -C -o $outdir/$s.jf -F 2 <(zcat $indir/$s.R1.fastq.gz) <(zcat $indir/$s.R2.fastq.gz)
	jellyfish dump -c $outdir/$s.jf | sort -k 1 > $outdir/$s.txt # <= here sort is important !
done
# Step 2: joinCounts
echo -n "tag" | gzip -c > $kmer_tab_path
for s in ${sample_list[@]} # $sample_list contains list of considered sample names
do
	echo -ne "\t"$s | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path
done
echo "" | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif joinCounts -r 1 -a 1 $outdir/*.txt | gzip -c >> $kmer_tab_path # no filter of recurrence
```

Note: please keep in mind that the ```sort``` after ```jellyfish dump``` is important for joinCounts.

**KaMRaT index**

```bash
mkdir $outdir/kamrat.idx
# Make index for k-mer matrix with k=31, unstranded mode, and with a count per billion normalization
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat index -intab $kmer_tab_path -outdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -klen 31 -unstrand -nfbase 1000000000
```

**KaMRaT rank-merge approach**

```bash
# Select top 50% of relevant k-mers using ttest pi-value
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat rank -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -rankby ttest.pi -design $indir/rank-design.txt -outpath $outdir/top-ranked-kmers.ttest-pi.bin -seltop 0.5
# Extend k-mers by tolerating overlap from 30nc to 15nc, intervened by Pearson distance <= 0.20, and with mean contig count
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat merge -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -overlap 30-15 -with $outdir/top-ranked-kmers.ttest-pi.bin -interv pearson:0.20 -outpath $outdir/contig-counts.ttest-pi.pearson20.tsv -withcounts mean
```

**KaMRaT merge-rank approach**

```bash
# Extend k-mers by tolerating overlap from 30nc to 15nc, intervened by Pearson distance <= 0.20, and with mean contig count
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat merge -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -overlap 30-15 -interv pearson:0.20 -outpath $outdir/contigs.pearson20.bin
# Select top 50% of relevant contigs using ttest pi-value
singularity exec --bind /src:/des kamrat.sif kamrat rank -idxdir $outdir/kamrat.idx -rankby ttest.pi -design $indir/rank-design.txt -seltop 0.5 -with $outdir/contigs.pearson20.bin -outpath $outdir/top-ranked-contigs.pearson20.ttest-pi.tsv -withcounts
```

## Typical Workflow of KaMRaT

KaMRaT *per se* is shown at the center of the workflow. It is a C++ program that takes as input a count matrix and produces another matrix as output.
In the workflow shown, KaMRaT is used for reducing a count matrix produced from a set of fastq files and producing a reduced matrix with features of interest with respect to conditions in the input sample-info file.

![workflow](./docs/workflow.png)

The feature matrix contains features in row and samples in column. Features can be *k*-mers (for all modules) as well as other general features such as genes/transcripts (only for KaMRaT-index, -filter, and -rank). The feature counts can be either normalized or non-normalized. 

The *k*-mer feature matrix can be constructed with the following possibilities: 

-   The [Snakefile](./related-tools/prepare_kmer_table/Snakefile) provided with the project + [DE-kupl joinCounts](https://github.com/Transipedia/dekupl-joinCounts)
-   [Kmtricks](https://github.com/tlemane/kmtricks) software
-   [DE-kupl](https://github.com/Transipedia/dekupl-run)'s raw-counts.tsv or masked-counts.tsv matrices

A set of auxiliary tools to be used for upstream and downstream of kamrat are provided:
+ Upstream tools: 
  + A matrix generating module controlled by Snakemake which applying jellyfish and DE-kupl joinCounts module
  + A bash script for generating a submatrix by selecting from it a set of columns
+ Downstream tools:
  + A feature selection model with an R script applying ridge/lasso regressions and random forest classifier
  + A contig counting module implemented in C++ for estimating the counts of a list of contigs in an independent dataset; it also supports evaluation of sample count coherence among contig's compositional k-mers 
  + A model evaluation module written in R taking a trained model and evaluating it with a feature count matrix and feature conditions

## Installation

<details>
<summary>Build from source</summary>

### Dependencies

+ [MLPack 3.3.2](https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack/releases/tag/3.3.2)
+ [Boost-iostreams](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_74_0/libs/iostreams/doc/index.html)

MLPack can be installed on [Linux/Mac](https://mlpack.org/doc/mlpack-3.3.2/doxygen/build.html), [Windows](https://mlpack.org/doc/mlpack-3.3.2/doxygen/build_windows.html), or via [conda](https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/mlpack) by following the corresponding links.  
If you are installing MLPack with conda, please add the following line into your `.bashrc` file in the `home/` directory before compiling KaMRaT:

``` bash
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/path_to_conda_env/mlpack/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
```

### Clone and Build

Firstly, clone the repository:

``` bash
git clone --recursive https://github.com/Transipedia/KaMRaT.git
cd KaMRaT
```

If you installed MLPack library with conda:

``` bash
bash compile.bash /path_to_MLPack_conda_environment
```

Otherwise, if you installed MLPack without conda:

``` bash
bash compile.bash
```

Finally, an executable binary file is available as `bin/kamrat`.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Use singularity</summary>

If using KaMRaT inside singularity, only by pulling from docker hub is enough:

```bash
singularity build KaMRaT.sif docker://xuehl/kamrat:latest
```
</details>

## General Information

### Sample Information File

The sample-info file is indicated by the option `-smp-info`. This file aims to indicate which columns in the k-mer count matrix should be considered as sample columns. Please do not put any header line in the file, since the columns are already defined by convention as below.  

+ If the file contains only one column, it indicates sample names, and all samples are considered as the same condition
+ If the file contains two columns, the first column corresponds to sample names, and the second corresponds to conditions (*e.g.* tumor, normal)
+ If the file is not provided, all columns in the matrix apart from the first one are considered as samples

### Input Count Matrix for KaMRaT


The input count matrix should be in .tsv or .tsv.gz format, in which fields are separated by tabulations. 
In the matrix, features are presented as rows, and samples as columns. The first column in matrix should always be the feature column (sequences or feature names).  
"Features" can be any quantified feature such as genes, k-mers or contigs. k-mers or contigs are represented by their own sequence.
KaMRaT accepts extra columns representing non-count values, e.g. feature's p-value, score, etc. In this case, a smp-info file is mandatory for indicating which columns are the count columns.

### Output Count Matrix by KaMRaT

The output count matrix is also .tsv format table, where fields are separated by tabs.  
In the matrix, the features are presented as rows, and the columns are in same order as the input.  
KaMRaT guarantees the information of output matrix is coherent with that of the input matrix. For KaMRaT-rank, though there are steps of count normalization, log transformation and standardization for score evaluation, the count values in output matrix are kept same as input (raw count).

## Usage

Note: if you use KaMRaT in command line, please remember to indicate the full path to KaMRaT binary file.

### KaMRaT Execution

We recommande using KaMRaT within ```singularity```:

``` bash
singularity exec -B /bind_src:/bind_des kamrat <CMD> [options] input_table 
# <CMD> can be one of filter, mask, merge, rank
```

The ```-B``` option is for binding disk partitions to singularity image, please check ```singularity``` helper for details:

```bash
singularity exec -h
```

It's also executable directly on command line:

```bash
/path_to_KaMRaT_bin_dir/kamrat <CMD> [options] input_table 
# <CMD> can be one of filter, mask, merge, rank
```

In the following sections, we present under the situation of using KaMRaT in ```singularity```.  
For running it directly on command line, please replace the leading ```singularity exec -B /bind_src:/bind_des``` by the path to KaMRaT binary file.

### KaMRaT Helper

KaMRaT's top-level helper is accessible by typing one of these commands:

``` bash
singularity exec kamrat
singularity exec kamrat -h
singularity exec kamrat -help
```

Helpers of each KaMRaT modules are accessible via:

``` bash
# <CMD> can be one from filter, mask, merge, rank #
singularity exec kamrat <CMD> -h
singularity exec kamrat <CMD> -help
```

### KaMRaT Usage by Module

<details>
<summary>index: index feature count table on disk</summary>

```text
[USAGE]    kamrat index -intab STR -outdir STR [-klen INT -unstrand -nfbase INT]

[OPTION]         -h, -help      Print the helper
                 -intab STR     Input table for index, mandatory
                 -outdir STR    Output index directory, mandatory
                 -klen          k-mer length, mandatory if features are k-mer
                                    if present, indexation will be switched to k-mer mode
                 -unstrand      Unstranded mode, indexation with canonical k-mers
                                    if present, indexation will be switched to k-mer mode
                 -nfbase INT    Base for calculating normalization factor
                                    normCount_ij <- INT * rawCount_ij / sum_i{rawCount_ij}
                                    if not provided, input counts will not be normalized
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>filter: filter feature by expression level</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat filter -idxdir STR -design STR [-upmin INT1:INT2 -downmax INT1:INT2 -reverse -outpath STR -withcounts]

[OPTION]         -h,-help              Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR           Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -design STR           Path to filter design file, a table of two columns, mandatory
                                           the first column indicate sample names
                                           the second column should be either UP or DOWN (capital letters)
                                               samples with UP will be considered as up-regulated samples
                                               samples with DOWN will be considered as down-regulated samples
                                               samples not given will be neutral (not considered for filter)
                                               samples can also be all UP or all DOWN
                 -upmin INT1:INT2      Up feature lower bound, [1:1, meaning no filter]
                                           output features counting >= INT1 in >= INT2 UP-samples
                 -downmax INT1:INT2    Down feature upper bound [inf:1, meaning no filter]
                                           output features counting <= INT1 in >= INT2 DOWN-samples
                 -reverse              Reverse filter, to remove eligible features [false]
                 -outpath STR          Path to results after filter
                                           if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts           Output sample count vectors [false]
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>mask: mask k-mers from matrix</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat mask -idxdir STR -fasta STR [-reverse -outpath STR -withcounts]
              
[OPTION]         -h,-help         Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR      Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -fasta STR       Sequence fasta file as the mask, mandatory;
                 -reverse         Reverse mask, to select the k-mers in sequence fasta file [false];
                 -outpath STR     Path to extension results
                                      if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts      Output sample count vectors [false]
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>merge: extend k-mers into contigs</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat merge -idxdir STR -overlap MAX-MIN [-with STR1[:STR2] -interv STR[:FLOAT] -min-nbkmer INT -outpath STR -withcounts STR]

[OPTION]         -h,-help               Print the helper;
                 -idxdir STR            Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory;
                 -overlap MAX-MIN       Overlap range for extension, mandatory
                                            MIN and MAX are integers, MIN <= MAX < k-mer length;
                 -with STR1[:STR2]      File indicating k-mers to be extended (STR1) and rep-mode (STR2)
                                            if not provided, all indexed k-mers are used for extension
                                            in the file STR1, a supplementary column of rep-value can be provided
                                            STR2 can be one of {min, minabs, max, maxabs} [min];
                 -interv STR[:FLOAT]    Intervention method for extension [pearson:0.20]
                                            can be one of {none, pearson, spearman, mac}
                                            the threshold may follow a ':' symbol;
                 -min-nbkmer INT        Minimal length of extended contigs [0];
                 -outpath STR           Path to extension results
                                            if not provided, output to screen;
                 -withcounts STR        Output sample count vectors, STR can be one of [mean, median]
                                            if not provided, output without count vector
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>rank: rank features according to their association with sample conditions</summary>


```text
[USAGE]    kamrat rank -idxdir STR -count-mode STR -rankby STR -design STR [-with STR1[:STR2] -seltop NUM -outpath STR -withcounts]

[OPTION]         -h,-help             Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR          Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -rankby STR          Ranking method, mandatory, can be one of:
                                          ttest.padj      adjusted p-value of t-test between conditions
                                          ttest.pi        \u03C0-value of t-test between conditions
                                          snr             signal-to-noise ratio between conditions
                                          dids            DIDS score
                                          lr:nfold        accuracy by logistic regression classifier
                                          bayes:nfold     accuracy by naive Bayes classifier
                                          svm:nfold       accuracy on SVM classifier
                 -design STR          Path to file indicating sample-condition design
                                          without header line, each row can be either:
                                          sample name, sample condition
                                          sample name, sample condition, sample batch (only for lrc, nbc, and svm)
                 -with STR1[:STR2]    File indicating features to rank (STR1) and counting mode (STR2)
                                          if not provided, all indexed features are used for ranking
                                          STR2 can be one of [rep, mean, median]
                 -seltop NUM          Select top ranked features
                                          if NUM > 1, number of top features to select (should be integer)
                                          if 0 < NUM <= 1, ratio of top features to select
                                          if absent or NUM <= 0, output all features
                 -outpath STR         Path to ranking result
                                          if not provided, output to screen
                 -withcounts          Output sample count vectors [false]

[NOTE]     For ranking methods lrc, nbc, and svm, a univariate CV fold number (nfold) can be provided
               if nfold = 0, leave-one-out cross-validation
               if nfold = 1, without cross-validation, training and testing on the whole datset
               if nfold > 1, n-fold cross-validation
           For t-test ranking methods, a transformation log2(x + 1) is applied to sample counts
           For SVM ranking, sample counts standardization is applied feature by feature
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>query: query sequences</summary>

```text
[USAGE]    kamrat query -idxdir STR -fasta STR -toquery STR [-withabsent -outpath STR]

[OPTION]         -h,-help         Print the helper
                 -idxdir STR      Indexing folder by KaMRaT index, mandatory
                 -fasta STR       Sequence fasta file, mandatory
                 -toquery STR     Query method, mandatory, can be one of:
                                      mean        mean count among all composite k-mers for each sample
                                      median      median count among all composite k-mers for each sample
                 -withabsent      Output also absent queries (count vector all 0) [default: false]
                 -outpath STR     Path to extension results
                                      if not provided, output to screen
```

</details>

## Software/Library Citations

Armadillo:

+ Conrad Sanderson and Ryan Curtin. Armadillo: a template-based C++ library for linear algebra. Journal of Open Source Software, Vol. 1, pp. 26, 2016.
+ Conrad Sanderson and Ryan Curtin. A User-Friendly Hybrid Sparse Matrix Class in C++. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS), Vol. 10931, pp. 422-430, 2018.

[Boost C++ Library](https://www.boost.org/)

DE-kupl: Audoux, J., Philippe, N., Chikhi, R. et al. DE-kupl: exhaustive capture of biological variation in RNA-seq data through k-mer decomposition. Genome Biol 18, 243 (2017).

MLPack: R.R. Curtin, M. Edel, M. Lozhnikov, Y. Mentekidis, S. Ghaisas, S. Zhang. mlpack 3: a fast, flexible machine learning library. Journal of Open Source Software 3:26, 2018.

glmnet: Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, and Rob Tibshirani. "Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent." Journal of statistical software 33.1 (2010): 1.

randomForest: Liaw, Andy, and Matthew Wiener. "Classification and regression by randomForest." R news 2.3 (2002): 18-22.
